# End to end runtime verification for RTS

This directory contains the drivers and testcases that implement test
scenarios defined in [](../specs/test_scenarios.lando).

Each scenario is a template, potentially parameterized by a set of
variables, as outlined below.

To run all the tests, just run:

``` sh
make
```

Some tests have a large number of cases. As the implementation and
tests are symmetric, you can do a quick sanity run by setting the
`QUICK` environment variable, i.e.:

``` sh
QUICK=1 make
```

Individual tests can be run (and debugged) by using the `test.py` script:

``` sh
RTS_BIN=path/to/rts/binary ./test.py <path/to/scenario> [path/to/scenario.cases]
```

Defining the `RTS_DEBUG` envrionment variable will cause the tester to
print out debug output, including which commands are sent to the
binary and which output is being checked.

## Scenario format

A scenario is a file whose structure is:

  1. An optional list of parameters
  2. A sequence of commands

A command is either a RTS command (such as "M" for setting maintenance
mode) or a regular expression preceeded by the character `?`.

Tests proceed by executing commands one by one. Regular expressions
are tested against the output produced thus far. A test fails if a
regular expression fails to match after a number of retries.

For example, the scenario:

    {T}
    V 0 0 {T}
    V 1 0 {T}

    ?#I 0.*

has one parameter `T`. Next the commands `V 0 0 {T}` and `V 1 0 {T}`
are RTS commands that simulate a temperature sensor reading of the
_value_ of the parameter `T` in both sensors. Finally, the regular
expression at the bottom simply tests that the string `#I 0` is
eventually printed to the console.

## "Skipped" tests

This directory includes a set of "skipped" tests. Actually these are
scenarios that may _refine_ those already under `scenarios`. Some of
these refinements require very sophisticated regular expressions to
match against, and hence we do not currently use them for testing.

For example, `exceptional_5{a,b,c,d,e}` describe scenarios where a
demultiplexor fails. One way to check this condition is to look for
the warning that two sensors differ by too large of a value. Another
test, that is not quite equivalent, would be look for a UI state in
which at least two sensor values differ: clearly this is quite a
complicated regular expression.

## License

   Copyright 2021, 2022, 2023 Galois, Inc.

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
